We begin always feeling the presence of Guru Padma Sambhava, embodiment of all the Buddhas
of the three times, all the lineage masters, really feeling that presence. Judith was asking
about the importance of visualization and how to really connect with that. And so yes,
I mean, of course, visually, we can visualize Guru Padma Sambhava and all the refuge tree
to the best of our ability. And the main point with that is, again, having that heart and
that motivation of joy, appreciation, just really savoring how precious this fleeting
moment is, and how beautiful that we're on path of accumulating our merit and our wisdom,
and really increasing, spreading our bodhicitta, thinking this is all for the benefit of all
beings without exception. And then keeping that purity, relaxing with just the sacred
awesome natural display of things as they are, as being perfect and pure, and just perfect
situation for recognizing the meaning of the teachings. So that's really at the heart of
what we're doing with our visualization. We're also developing our concentration. So we have
these wonderful supports, like if you have an image of Guru Padma Sambhava and the refuge
tree, you can really keep that right before you as a statue or a photograph, or if you
have a painting, these are beautiful, just focus on one part, and you can spread that.
But then really important is feeling that presence, the loving presence, just thinking
of them inseparable from the teachers we have in this life. Thinking of kympo seh wan don
jo renpoche, kin chen paul don renpoche, whatever great noble beings that we encountered and
have in our lives to guide us and support us, that's inseparable. And just also relaxing
again on that purity aspect of the pure vision that there's nothing right now when we're
practicing. There's nothing that is not the mandala of the Buddha Dharma Sangha. There's
nothing that is not the source of all blessings, the Guru, the source of all realizations and
accomplishments, which is the yidams and the source of all enlightened activity to ripen
and nurture beings, which is the dakini. Everything is Guru Padma Sambhava, so we don't have to
also be limited in the perception that Guru Padma Sambhava just appears one way, really
the teachings are, is everywhere. And the Lama is also, they said on the inner level,
really our mindfulness, our alertness, our conscientiousness, you know, keeping our view,
engaging with our meditation and conduct that supports that. So I just thought to touch
on that since someone was asking about visualization. Yes, focus on concentrating and visualizing
use of support of like a statue or image, but also really absorb all the teachings knowing
there's nothing outside of the mandala of Guru Padma Sambhava in this case. Okay, so
we begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll do our lineage prayers and then
we will begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer,
page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the
seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and
then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer,
and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 15, and then we'll begin the seven line
prayer, page 16, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 17, and then we'll
begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page
14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line
prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll
begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page
14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line
prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll
begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page
15, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 16, and then we'll begin the seven line
prayer, page 15, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 16, and then we'll
begin the seven line prayer, page 16, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page
14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line
prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll
begin the seven line prayer, page 14, and then we'll begin the seven line prayer, page
14, and again, just a reminder to really save her as we're reading. This is all meditation,
so as we're chanting, really just resting our awareness, expanding our bodhicitta, really
absorbing the meaning, kind of letting that all flow. So page 18, the essence, primarily
unchanging, the innate nature, free from elaboration, dwells as the youthful base body, the
originally
pure profound clarity. Dharmakaya Lama, Yeshe Dorje, be aware of me. Please grant the blessings
to attain great confidence in the view. The nature, unceasing, conjoined configuration
of luminous clarity, dwells as the display of the spontaneously present five certainties.
Sambhogakaya Lama, Dhichandorje, be aware of me. Please grant the blessings to perfect
great ability in meditation. The compassion without bias, the primordial wisdom free from
all limitations, dwells as the essence of all pervading, naked awareness, emptiness.
Ramana Kaya Lama, Drodho Lingpa, be aware of me. Please grant the blessings to accomplish
great progress and action. The primordial ground of one's own awareness is unchanging and unmoving.
Whatever arises as the expression of the Dharmakaya is neither good nor bad. Since awareness of
nowness is actually the Buddha, the completely free serene Lama is revealed in one's inner
most heart. When this original mind is realized as the very nature of the Lama, there is no
need for whining contrived prayers made with grasping and attachment. By letting go in
the free natural flow of uncontrived awareness, not holding whatever arises, the blessings
of self liberation are obtained. Through fabricated practice, there is no time to achieve
enlightenment.
This meditation produced through mental analysis and intellect is a deceiving enemy. Now conceptual
ization
falls apart with the band and of a madman. Let this life be spent in a state of uninhibited
naked ease. Whatever one does, joyful practitioner of the great perfection, in any company happy,
lineage holder of the lotus born, protector without rival, great treasure revealing Lama,
seems beyond compare. Hard essence of the dakinis, by dispelled the heart's darkness, great
ignorance
in its own place. The undemidered sun of luminous clarity shines continuously. This good fortune
is the kindness of the Lama. The only father, unrepayable kindness, only remember the Lama.
Unrepairable kindness, only remember the Lama. Unrepairable kindness, only remember the Lama.
Let's go to the four thoughts that turn the mind toward the Dharma.
[music]
[singing]
The freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born isn't permanent and bound to die. The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions,
which are causes, are inexorable. The three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean
of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Now, Lama, invaluable constant protector, be aware of me. The freedoms and favorable conditions of
this human birth
are extremely difficult to obtain. Everything born isn't permanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions, which are causes, are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Now, Lama, invaluable constant protector, be aware of me.
The freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born is impermanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions, which are causes, are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Now, Lama, invaluable constant protector, be aware of me.
[silence]
Now, we'll move to the inner extraordinary nundo practices.
This always begins with the refuge, the gateway to all the Buddhist practice and study.
And so, as we've been doing, we'll start doing a few of the chant with the visualization of Guru
Padmasambhava
and all the refuge tree, and we'll do some just prostration sitting down,
and then we'll get up, and we'll all do prostrations together with a refuge prayer,
with that deep trust and closeness feeling, devotion to the three jewels, the three roots,
with this beautiful commitment we have.
[singing]
From now, until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama, the three jewels.
[silence]
We'll get up, and we'll do prostrations in the refuge for maybe about five, ten minutes.
[singing]
[silence]
From now, until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama, the three jewels.
And then we'll just let the visualization all condense, merge with Guru Patmasambhava.
And then we'll just rest in our awareness, inseparable, which is the big refuge.
[silence]
And then we'll move to the next section.
And again, as we move from section to section, we're not leaving anything behind.
We're just connecting with slightly different aspects of our practice, which nourish and supplement
everything.
And so here, this next section is emphasizing the bodhicitta, and really our bodhicitta commitment
and aspiration,
in the presence of those who've really realized it, those who have realized the heart of
enlightenment,
all the Noble Sangha, and just really connecting with our beautiful motivation.
From now, that from now, until samsara is empty, until every being is free of suffering and its
causes,
that will be part of everything that helps nurture, protect and nurture and blossom them to
realizing their own true nature.
And then also being of benefit to others, which is a deep, profound, vast, beautiful motivation and
realization and a path.
So just as we're doing the practice, really here, we're connecting with, again, we kind of went
over the last time we talked,
these four boundless thoughts.
These are the aspirational aspect of really connecting with bodhicitta, with the mind of
enlightenment,
the real motivation to really realize Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings without exception.
And then how has that done is through actualizing the six paramitas, the six transcendental perfect
ions,
which are how the Buddha pointed out in six kind of aspects, six main practices that all work
together
within the three trainings of our discipline and conduct, our concentration, our wisdom,
that are what we're doing with the six paramitas, entails all the bodhisattva trainings and
practices.
Because what is that? It's nothing foreign, it's nothing outside. Our practice is recognizing our
nature.
And that means, Buddha is kind of also right, pointing out, we haven't recognized it.
Anyone who hasn't recognized it is suffering. Like we even in these four thoughts, samsara is
suffering.
So connecting with that tender heart and that understanding that to different degrees, we just don
't understand our situation.
And others don't either. Having that tender heart for that ignorance and the suffering born of
ignorance.
Really, for ourselves, for others, and then having courage on the path.
Because we all know everything's not always feeling like sunshine.
But if we've taken refuge in the three jewels and the three roots and responsible for our own mind,
and we're really aiming with a beautiful motivation to really create less trouble for ourselves and
others,
at least, if not create more benefit and happiness for others.
What could be more beautiful? And then the Buddha pointed out that really comes ultimately,
and that temporarily and ultimately, if we can understand our own nature, our own mind, and its
aspects of limitless wisdom,
love, compassion, that is bodhicitta. So having that courage, you know, as we hear the teachings,
we're developing our wisdom, which is going to engender all the other trainings we have.
We do that through study, through contemplation, and really through practice, through meditation.
And then connect, you know, from this base ignorance through which we're all suffering.
Then, as our wisdom grows, we can uproot, you know, our poverty mentality,
which is through the practices of generosity.
And we can uproot, you know, our misconduct and our kind of actions that cause more trouble for
ourselves and others
through being more sensitive to the different situations we encounter.
And that's transcendental conduct. And we can uproot our frustration that things aren't how we want
them to be,
or how they should be, or who we're supposed to be, or who others are supposed to be,
or the situation, and just accept things as they are, and have patience for the path,
and patience for our understanding, you know, and not lose heart just because we have some
challenges,
but really meet our opportunities, no matter how they're appearing, but really keeping in mind
they're all opportunities for awakening, taking that responsibility and that self-empowerment,
and knowing we have the blessings of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and their support,
and not wandering aimlessly, but really focusing on developing our concentration and our wisdom.
So again, just quickly reviewing those six paramitas, which are how we actualize our Buddha nature
for the benefit of all beings, recognize the nature as it is, and then we move on.
So again, about keeping courage, and just like if our hands are dirty,
if we follow the instructions with some soap and water, our hands will be clean.
Our Buddha nature and the Buddha nature of everyone is there,
and we have beautiful examples of those who followed the practices
and absorbed them into their hearts and conduct and not made barriers between their practice and
their life.
And so essentially that's what we're doing here, really connecting with our beautiful bodhicitta
motivation,
extending, opening our heart, letting that go with pure motivation to all beings,
having being free of suffering and its causes, having happiness and all its causes,
having all the fulfillments, temporary and ultimate,
and that everyone can be impartial and see everyone as a loving relation and another great support.
Like we've said before, we're all on the same boat. We all have the same beautiful nature.
And then for those of us who haven't recognized it, we're all on the same boat and that we're all
having some trouble.
But, you know, something deeper. So I'll stop talking and we'll do our practice. Thank you.
In the presence of all the objects of refuge, bearing witness on our motivation,
that will carry into all our lives.
From now until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient
parent beings.
And then with that chant, we'll just all connect and we'll do about one mala of recitations of the
bodhicitta vow.
[Hums]
From now until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient
parent beings.
From now until samsara becomes empty, from now until samsara becomes empty, from now until samsara
becomes empty.
From now until samsara becomes empty, from now until samsara becomes empty.
From now until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient
parent beings.
Thank you very much.
(Bell)
And with big bodhicitta, joy and appreciation to the three jewels, we'll make the mandala offering,
activating those six paramitas.
The bodies, enjoyments, possessions and glories of the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations.
Again, we'll go at our own rate for about five minutes.
The body, enjoyments, possessions and glories of the succession of all my lifetimes,
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations,
I offer to the three initials in order to complete the two accumulations,
[BLANK_AUDIO]